Another area of research that has been done here
and reported in several places, including one of
the held in Brazil, and two years ago, almost two
years ago, at the first Latin American Polity
Congress, which was held in Mexico City, this
subject was reported. But it is a very popular area
of concern among institutional as well as
industry people at the present time, and that is
the so-called recycling of poultry wastes. And we
did some work on this, actually recycling it to In
the poultry, the most common usage of the
recycling of the nutrients and the actual feed
wastage from the troughs and also the undigested
material going through the birds, you see, plus
what little they can get from the litter that they
use for growing the birds. They call this... DPW,
dried poultry waste, and it has been used rather
extensively for feeding of cattle. It is still
frowned upon, its use is still frowned upon by the
FDA because they are afraid of a
additives that may still be in the material and
thus pick it up as residues in the tissues. But the
people, the industry people, are very careful
about this and they normally do not use it if
there's any possibility of contamination of the
tissues of animals. But in 1969, we published,
that's five years ago, we published an article
which covered two years of work with laying hens
where we recycled this. litter from three
different sources, from the broilers and from
laying hens and from pullets that had been raised
to laying age. And these three sources of the DPW,
or dried poultry waste, and we used this and used it
at 10 and 20 percent levels and got very good
results. It can be reused. In other words, we only
reused it one time, but it probably could be
recycled again and again, particularly if it's
used with cattle, I'm quite sure, that can be
reused. And so we think we were fairly early in our
interest in this area and actually did some
experimental work in this area.
I've noted that a large percentage of the work that
you have done on chickens has been with laying
hens. How did you come to settle upon laying hens as
opposed to broilers or some other aspect? Well,
that's a very good question, and it has perhaps a
surprising answer, but not necessarily so. You
will recall that when I entered the poultry
department at Texas A&M University, I entered it
as head of the department in an administrative
position. And so we were affected in the same way
that almost all institutions are. You never have
enough financial support to do all of the things
that you and your staff want to do. So you have to
sort of set up priorities and use your funds in this
fashion. Well, this being true, you see, that
there is... rarely, if ever, enough funds to do all
the things that a scientific staff wants to do. It
was quite important, being head of the
department, that I try to set up a research program
were there would be no opportunity for staff to
feel that the department head was using his
authority to take funds ahead of somebody else who
needed them, you see. And when I first started this
program, At the laying hens, my research with
laying hens has majorly been designed in the
applied or practical kind of areas rather than in
the highly basic or scientific areas. And this is
also purposely set up because At the time the
program started, the income from the sale of
surplus eggs from the experiments was that the
price of eggs was generally high enough to pay for
the feed, the labor, and so that actually the
research program of the laying hens was
self-supporting. And therefore, I could use the
sales returns from the research program and feel
free of not being misunderstood in terms of
priorities, administrative priorities, for the
research program. And so that is the reason why
this was picked. In the case of broilers, if the
price of broilers was high at the time you marketed
your birds, then you probably got some returns.
But if, on the other hand, it was low, you might have
lost some money. But at that time, laying hands,
now it happens that actually the price of eggs in
the meantime have changed so that currently you'd
be subject to the same danger. that you would
withdraw this. But in those days, it was not so, and
this determined two things. That I would pick
laying hens for my experimental program, and that
I'd pick the productive, applied efficiency
areas, management and so on, those areas of
research, rather than the costly, basic type of
research. That way you would leave the funds
appropriated by the state for the other members of
the department. Yes, yes. And I was very careful
for them to see the budgets as the appropriations
were made each year, and also for them to see what
they had available for their programs. And I
think, as far as I know, I did not have complaints. I
might not have ever heard them, if there's been
any. But I was real proud of the fact that I
overheard little and no complaints because of
this. And it was done purposely for this reason.
You mentioned just a minute ago about for a long
time eggs were kind of a steady cash crop, but now
the price tends to fluctuate more than it did in the
past. Yes, and not only that, but the margins, the
egg production units have become so large. There
used to be a fairly large margin between the cost of
production and the sale price of the eggs. But now,
because the units have gotten so big—now, I don't
know which is cause and which is—well, I do, too,
but it could be rationalized which is cause and
which is effect. But the units are so large today
that they have to be that way because the margins
have gotten so narrow between the actual
production cost price cost and the sale price of
the eggs. And for that reason, there isn't much
margin left there. And so you're very close to the
same kind of a fluctuating pattern that we have in
broilers.
During your tenure as head of the department, how
were your research projects chosen? Did you see a
problem and try to solve it, or did you have an
interest and follow the interest? Well, of course
it was a combination of both because none of us like
to do work that we don't like ourselves. But here I
mentioned when we first started this area of
discussion, I mentioned that here might be an area
where an individual could boast a little bit.
Well, here's what I did. I have religiously and
many times, partly if not wholly at my own expense,
I have attended national and international
meetings to keep up with what the problems were in
this country domestically, in the various
states, and in the various countries of the world,
what problems were bothering the and troubling
the production group and so i was able by this
method to keep up with these and in a few cases i hope
that intuitively i anticipated what was coming
next And so for this reason, we tried to get the
answers at least by the time they were needed, and
in a few cases, ahead of that. I think in one
particular case, in the matter of phase fading, we
had some answers before industry was ready to
adopt it. And as a result, it didn't get much
attention for quite a long while.
Okay. I noted that in the past you had had several
occasions on which you had a foreign assignment.
Could you talk about those for a little bit? Yes, I
was very fortunate in
making some of the foreign meetings, as I said,
part of them at my own expense and part of them at the
invitation of the particular governments that
were involved, and the major source of funds for
the foreign trips was AID assignments, and so I
participated always on a short-term basis,
because I could not afford to be gone very long. But
these have always been quite attractive to me, I
like to travel. I love to meet and get to know people
in other countries and to see their problems as
well as our own. And back to our research program,
here's another one that we might have anticipated
a little bit because when I came back from hawaii
most of the birds in hawaii this was not
necessarily intuitive but purely an observation
that in hawaii most of the birds were housed laying
birds were housed in cages And almost no birds in
Texas at that time were housed in cages. There were
quite a few in California, but none in Texas. So we
initiated, immediately initiated, a
cage-laying experiment and started getting
together data on the feeding of cage-layers and
the management of cage-layers. And so now almost
100% of the birds in some of the states are housed in
cages, and a very high percentage of the lame birds
in Texas are now housed in cages as well. But at
first, some of those early reports were not always
accepted as friendlily as I would like for them to
have been, but they were, and so for that reason, we
believe that THIS ENTERED IN TO THE
availability for some of the foreign
assignments. By caged layers, you mean is each
chicken in an individual cage? At first they
majorly were housed this way, but very quickly
they, and a lot of the work was done here that showed
that it could be done otherwise. The cost of
building a cage for one bird is fairly high. So what
they did, they started putting what we call higher
density. In other words, we put two birds per cage,
three birds per cage. In a few cases, the cages
would be a little bigger in size. But the density,
the square footage of the cage area allowed per
bird was reduced as we added more birds. And so the
common practice now is to house from three to five
birds per cage per unit. And you get more eggs at
less cost in this method than by letting the birds
run free? If they're properly managed. They have
to be de-beaked, keep them picking each other.
They have to be properly fed. And the diets have
been increased in density because there is more
competition between birds. There's both social
competition between birds, and there's also
mechanical competition for water and feeder
space. And so if they're properly managed, and all
of this had to be investigated experimentally in
order to supply industry with some of the answers
to some of the questions and solutions to some of
the problems they had in doing this. And
generally, there's been the initiation of the
POTI programs in many of the foreign countries
because of the... availability of labor. See,
labor's been cheap in most of the developing
countries. And the cage operation at first, at
least, it's become so mechanized now that it may
not any longer be true in this country. But the
labor required for cage operation was a little
higher than the litter floor kind of operation.
And so it just it became natural to recommend cage
operations in these foreign countries. And this
led to, as you went from one to another, this led to
assignments in the various countries.
But in view of the fact that you were head of the very
active department here on campus, it was not
possible for you to really take a long-term
assignment. Right. The longest assignment that I
ever took was six weeks. And these were usually
taken in the middle of a semester. rarely, I don't
believe ever, at budget-making time or at the
beginning of the semesters. It was usually, they
were flexible. These assignments were flexible,
and they usually were taken when the time could be
spared. And we had some very excellent people on
the staff who assumed responsibility for the
mechanical work of the department head while I was
gone. Now that you've reached retirement age and I
believe you told me earlier that you had finished
with all of the students who were working under you
at the time of your retirement. Do you look forward
to perhaps a longer stint abroad someplace in the
future? No, I just don't like to be gone. I want to
keep up with the United States, with my friends and
the industry and the progress of the industry in
the United States. And so I have limited my
assignments, longer than the six weeks, but I've
limited my assignments to three. Perhaps I might
be able to take three and a half or four months, but
I've limited to that. If an assignment is longer
than this, I think it would be no problem to get a
two-year assignment, but I will not accept a
two-year assignment anywhere. The maximum was
the one that I've had so far is the one I had this
year. early this year, the latter part of last
year, December, January, and February, the three
months in Pakistan. And there may be some others. I
can take up to three months now, but I do not plan to
take much longer than this length of assignment.
Again, it takes you too far away from your contacts
locally. Yes, yes. My ideas
are so small and so few that it doesn't take me much
more than three months to get a whole express
worked out. So for that reason, the longer
assignments, you actually may be getting into the
mechanics rather than to idea development. Well,
it's the type of thing you do. I take it as more
giving of advice rather than going in and setting
up a totally new program. Yeah, generally this is
true, yes. It's really, they are, I think all of the
assignments I've had could very well be called
consultantships. Now, there were AIDA
consultantships. There were, in some cases,
private industry consultantships. I've been
invited to go to some of the countries by private
industry for consultation. And in other cases,
it's been... for the government itself in these
countries, consultant with the government
officials as to how to design the program, whether
they should try to breed their own birds, or
whether they should import the breeding stock
from other countries and establish a franchise
kind of a breeding program, and this type of
information is major. The last assignment I spoke
of in Pakistan was an FAO, United Nations
assignment. That was my first United Nations
assignment, incidentally. But the type of
assignment that you have been accepting can be
handled in the short term, whereas if you were to go
into a developing country that had not had a
poultry science department and they wanted to
establish one, And they chose you to do that.
That's the kind that would take a long time. Yes,
that would take a long time. And I have not desired
and have not accepted responsibility for that
type of an assignment.
Are you continuing to carry on individual
research at the current time? Yes, on a bit of a
limited basis. A great deal of my research program
was carried on by the graduate students.
finishing up of the graduate students, well then
this means that I either have to have a technician
kind of help or I have to depend upon personally
doing the work myself and the labor that is not
trained in this area and has no particular concern
about the specific requirements of a research
program, and for that reason the experiments of
that sort I'm not willing to design the
experiments and have to throw the data away when I
get it accumulated. If you decide you're going to
feed a chicken a certain number of grams of the kind
of food per day, it has to be exactly that many. A few
too many would not matter so much to someone who is
not working on a degree in that area. But if a
student is working on a degree, then he's going to
be very careful if he doesn't write. I've had some
very fine graduate students in the past, and it's
been a real pleasure to work with them. They've
been quite exacting. and quite careful in their
program of work. And it's naturally mutual
because they, most of them, have been
establishing a learning and establishing a
program of activity to be continued post
graduation for them and so naturally they want to
to do a good job. And so as a result, it's been
dependable. I could depend upon it myself, and the
material could be published or used, distributed
to industry with a confidence that otherwise
might not be there.
I believe you have received a number of honors or
awards during your tenure here, are any of those
that particularly stand out in your mind as those
which, in a sense, you might have appreciated the
most of all? Well, it's been my privilege to serve
and
capacities within the organization, the honor
societies and the technical organizations to
which I belonged. And this has always been a real
challenge and a real reward when it's finished in
that regard. But there are certain awards that I
have received and for which I'm very grateful and
which have been a source of encouragement to me.
Perhaps just to mention a few of those, one would be
the...
the research, the former students distinguished
faculty achievement award. And mine was in the
area of research. And I very much appreciated
this. And it's been a real challenge, a real
encouragement for further achievement. And then
from industry, that would be from the university,
from the industry there are two things that stand
out in my mind. One is that the American Poultry and
Hatchery Federation, which has now been merged
with the Institute of American Poultry
Industries, asked me to serve as their research
director and they had about fifteen to twenty
thousand dollars a year that they wanted to put in
institutional research programs. And so it is my
business to accumulate research projects from
the Pony scientists in the various land grant,
mostly land grant, but there were other types of
institutions, assemble those during the year,
digest them, and then turn them over to the
research committee, three of these industry
members, and they pick then the particular
projects that were to be supported for the
following year, and then a small grant. The grants
were purposely small because they wanted to
distribute them widely to encourage research in
the areas in which they were having problems. And
you asked a moment ago about how we figured out
these problems. Well, this helped. I served for
about nine years. They called it the research
director of APHL. And I have a plaque
commemorating this service, but it was a very
delightful kind of experience. And then the other
was the receipt of the second Golden Feather
Award, which was made by our Texas Poetry
Federation in the state. This was made in 1969. And
it's right there behind you. And I'm very
extremely proud of that. Another one of our
faculty members, Mr. Ben Warmly, who is retired,
received the seventh one just about three weeks
ago at Dallas at the Texas Polar Federation
meeting. They give only one of those per year. One
per year, right.
So it must be rather a high honor to receive
something of that nature. Well, naturally, those
of us who received it consider it so. We could be
prejudiced. I would be. Well, I think anytime when
you're the only one in the entire state of Texas,
and I imagine the Poultry Federation is a sizable
group. It represents all of the commodity areas.
There's five different sections within it. There
is the hatchery group, there is the broiler group,
there's the egg group, there is the Allied Poultry
Association, all of those who sell vaccines,
equipment, etc. That's the Allied Poultry Group.
And then the egg production, egg producers, and I
think that's the hatchery, the egg, the broiler,
the turkey, yes, the Texas Turkey Federation
group. So those are all part of the Mother Hubbard
organization, which is called the Texas Poetry
Federation. And the award is made by the
federation, which represents all of those
groups.
Oh, gracious Jesus.